# 4 March 2021
# or, Nextstrain "lay of the land" sketch

Nextstrain is made up of many different pieces that all work together.  If
you're ready to go beyond using the website, nextstrain.org, (or just plain
curious!) it can be helpful to understand how the pieces fit together.

The core components of Nextstrain are Augur and Auspice.

    [TK illustrate two boxes]

Augur is a series of composable, modular bioinformatics tools. We use these to
create recipes for different pathogens and different analyses, which are easy
to reproduce given the same input data and easy to replicate when new data is
available.

    [TK illustrate w/ graphic on Augur's main docs page]

Auspice is a web-based visualization program, to present and interact with
phylogenomic and phylogeographic data. Auspice is what you see when, for
example, you visit nextstrain.org/ncov/global.

    [TK screenshot of nextstrain.org/ncov/global]

Augur produces data files which are visualized by Auspice.  These files are
often referred to as "JSONs" colloquially because they're typically JSON files.

    [TK illustrate data flow, with sample file names]

Builds are recipes of code and data that produce results for visualization and
analysis.  Builds run dozens of commands and often use Snakemake to manage the
pipeline workflow, but any workflow system can be used, such as Nextflow or
CWL.  As an example, our core builds are organized as Git repositories hosted
on GitHub which contain a Snakemake workflow using Augur, configuration, and
data.

nextstrain.org is a web application to host and present the core builds
maintained by the Nextstrain team, as well as builds maintained by many other
people [TK link to community pages and to Nextstrain Groups explainer].  It
incorporates Auspice for displaying each build.

You can run Augur and Auspice on your own computer and use them independently
or together with our core builds, community builds, and your own builds.  You
can even install Auspice on your own web server if you don't want to host your
builds via nextstrain.org.

The Nextstrain CLI (a program called `nextstrain`) ties together all of the
above to provide a consistent way to run pathogen builds, access Nextstrain
components like Augur and Auspice across computing environments such as Docker,
Conda, and AWS Batch, and publish datasets to nextstrain.org.
