# 28 May 2021
# or, OtterTune

I talked with Andy Pavlo (CMU database group, OtterTune) and Andy Ellicott
(OtterTune) for ~30 min.

Current clients include Booking.com (huge) and various large banks.

OtterTune the company is only a few weeks old (!), but the software and method
is years old and mature. Origins in the work of a just-graduated PhD student of
Andy's (whose named I missed :-/).

Initial tuning needs to be able to reboot the instance to be effective, and
there can be other negative impacts before the parameters settle down.
Monitoring-only setups cannot currently suggest changes for manual application,
but OtterTune does notice when parameters change even if it doesn't make the
changes itself. Thus, their suggested plan is to:

1. Setup an RDS secondary replica

2. Let OtterTune monitor and adjust the secondary on the fly, including
   performing reboots, for a period covering normal range of workloads. They
   said a few hours, but I think we'd need a day or two to capture daily
   seasonality.

3. Once changes settle down, copy the secondary's parameter group to the
   primary instance, turn off the secondary, and point OtterTune at the primary
   with reboots disabled.

4. OtterTune continues to make minor tweaks and adjustments over time as data
   and workloads change.

OtterTune would start by maximizing the p90 or p95 query time. This could be
thrown off by a bimodal distribution of queries or a heavy tail of slow
queries. With some future work, they could group queries by histogram buckets
and then target optimizations for two or more groups simultaneously.

## Security

AWS: Requires only a very limited IAM role for making changes to RDS parameter
groups and rebooting instances. I think we could even scope this to just the
secondary at first.

Pg: Requires only a very limited login + access to various internal statistics
tables. I don't think they even need to see query text (which is good).

## Savings

Quoted ability to eek out roughly a doubling of performance from any given RDS
instance size. e.g. your OtterTuned 4xlarge performs more like an untuned
8xlarge. This means you can delay time between instance size upgrades, or even
downgrade your current instance size to spend less, e.g. an OtterTuned 2xlarge
performs like your current untuned 4xlarge, so you can slash your RDS costs in
half.

They'll send some more material over supporting these claims.

## Costs

"A few thousand" upfront for the first month or so. This is essentially a
consulting engagement where they guide us through setup and initial tuning
(steps 1â€“3 above). It would also include some manual query tuning and other
suggestions, if we desire. Basically, hands on time from an OtterTune engineer.
"Less than what you'd pay a DBA to do consulting by hand."

"A few hundred" per month per RDS instance, with a yearly commitment. (Although
we could maybe push back on the time period of the commitment.)

Final numbers would be in an agreement they'll send over. I suspect we'd have
some room to negotiate.

## Checks for us

Is the amortized cost of OtterTune less than the AWS savings? Upfront + monthly
+ one-time cost of secondary replica.

Is the savings of OtterTune better than the savings from reserved instances?

## Alternatives

We could probably make pretty good strides ourselves by applying off the shelf
tools like pgBadger, postgresqltuner, and pgconfig.org. These are tools I've
used in the past with success. We also have the built-in RDS tools, which
aren't bad either. The downside is that this is additional time and effort, but
even a one-time investment of a  week or so would likely keep paying off
longer-term.

We could also hire a consultancy to tune the database for us. 2ndQuadrant does
this, for example.
