# 4 November 2021
# or, Snakemake config handling

This morning was the second or third time in a couple years that I've
(re-)worked out exactly how Snakemake handles all its ways of specifying and
merging config values.  I did this by reading the Snakemake source code[^1] and
then empirically validating my conclusions.

Snakemake's config handling is, in my experience, a bit unconventional compared
to other software which supports overlaying and overriding config values,
because it

  1. uses two different kinds of merging operations at different times, and
  2. the order of those operations is not a strict chain.

Snakemake's documentation doesn't include a page or section about the details
of config handling, but I'll try to contribute one later based on this
document.

## Specifying config

Every Snakemake workflow has access to a global variable, `config`, which
stores configuration values that are specified in a number a ways:

  - `configfile: "filename"` directive in a workflow file sets a JSON or YAML
    file to load.  The directive may appear multiple times.

  - `--config key=value [key=value […]]` sets top-level keys to the given
    value, which is parsed, in order, as either: `int(value)`, `float(value)`,
    literal `True` or `False` (a `bool`), a YAML-encoded value, or finally
    `str(value)`.  Only the last occurrence of the option is used if it is
    given more than once.

  - `--configfile file [file […]]` sets one or more JSON or YAML files to load.
    Only the last occurrence of the option is used if it is given more than
    once.

  - Profiles specified with the `--profile <name>` option or
    `SNAKEMAKE_PROFILE=<name>` environment variable can include `config` and/or
    `configfile` keys in the profile's `<name>/config.yaml` file.  The values
    of these keys become the defaults for the command-line options `--config`
    and `--configfile`, and thus are ignored if those options are given
    explicitly on the command line too.

All configuration files must be key-value mappings (e.g. `dict`s) at the
top-level.

## Merging of config

`user_config` starts as an empty `dict`.

First, all `--configfile` files (either from the profile or from the
command line) are loaded in the order given.  Each file is **shallowly-merged
into `user_config` using `dict.update()`**.  This means keys in subsequent files
always override the same key in earlier files; their values are never merged.

Then, all `--config` key-value pairs (either from the profile or from the
command line) are parsed in the order given and **shallowly-merged into
`user_config` using `dict.update()`**.

A deep copy of `user_config` is made at this point and assigned to the
workflow's `config` global.

Finally, the workflow is parsed and any `configfile:` directives are loaded in
the order they appear.  Each file is first **deeply-merged into `config`** by
recursively merging keys where the new value is a `dict`[^2].  New values which
are not `dict`s completely override existing values, if any.  Then, the
`user_config` is **deeply-merged back into `config`** by the same process.[^3]

## What does it all mean?

The overall effect is that the command-line config options (either used
directly or via a profile) construct an invocation-level user config which is
then deep-merged into the workflow-level base config established by
`configfile:` directives (that are themselves deep-merged together).

Profiles are merely a way to specify default command-line options in a YAML
file instead of on every command line.


[^1]: I specifically looked at
  [4816a58](https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake/commit/4816a58) today, but
  the behaviour described has been stable for a while before this point.

[^2]: Actually, any value that's a `collections.abc.Mapping`.  If the existing
  value for a key isn't a `dict` but the new value is (e.g. merging
  `{"x":{"y":1}}` into `{"x":42}`), an error occurs.

[^3]: This double merge is weird and creates strange edge cases.  I don't know
  why Snakemake does it.  I think it would make more sense to implement the
  behaviour I think Snakemake wants by merging all `configfile:` files together
  and then merging `user_config` into them.  This can still be implemented such
  that Snakemake's parser doesn't have to know all the `configfile:` directives
  in advance, which is my best guess for why it does what it does currently.
