# 21 July 2022
# or, Conda or not?

_see <https://github.com/nextstrain/cli/issues/114>_

A shell with `conda init` seems to have these persistently defined:

    CONDA_SHLVL=0
    CONDA_EXE=/home/tom/.conda/bin/conda
    CONDA_PYTHON_EXE=/home/tom/.conda/bin/python

When running `nextstrain` as installed from the Conda package, it's path (e.g.
`_` or maybe `sys.argv[0]`?) is a cousin of `CONDA_EXE`:

    _=/home/tom/.conda/envs/cli/bin/nextstrain

From within the `nextstrain` process, `__file__` is also a cousin:

    >>> __file__
    '/home/tom/.conda/envs/cli/lib/python3.10/site-packages/nextstrain/cli/command/debugger.py'

Easiest way might be to use `__file__` to look for an adjacent Conda package
metadata file:

    /home/tom/.conda/envs/cli/conda-meta/nextstrain-cli-4.1.1-pyhdfd78af_0.json

The presence of which is a ~sure indication that the CLI was installed via the
Conda package.

Nothing's ever actually sure though, and this wouldn't detect (AFAIK) if the
CLI was installed via the Conda package but then installed _again_ (e.g.
updated) via Pip.  This is known to happen because it's what `nextstrain
update` currently suggests and people have dutifully done it!  Still, I think
even in this situation, it's ok and even preferable to suggest reverting back
to updating with Conda.  If we wanted to detect this situation, we could use
the SHA digests in the conda-meta file to see if they match: if they do, it's a
pristine Conda package; if not, it's been tampered with (and probably by Pip).
We could potentially also use the contents of the Python-level dist info
(e.g. `nextstrain_cli-4.1.1.dist-info/`) to distinguish this situation.

Ah ha!  Speaking of dist info, the `INSTALLER` file might be our ticket!

    $ cat â€¦/nexstrain_cli-4.1.1.dist-info/INSTALLER
    conda

This seems nice and clear, esp. since importlib (or something similar) provides
a nice way to access dist info files.

When Pip installs something, the `INSTALLER` file contains `pip`.

Specs on `INSTALLER` ([ref 1](https://peps.python.org/pep-0376/#installer),
[ref 2](https://peps.python.org/pep-0627/#optional-installer-file)) say it's an
optional, single-line file the contents of which are:

> any ASCII string [suggested to be] the command-line command, if available.

Perfect!

More on dist info:

- https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/recording-installed-packages/
- https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0376
- https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0627

In terms of finding/querying those dist-info files, I don't see any
reasonable-looking libraries for directly doing so.  Was kinda hoping for
something in the stdlib, but alas, PEP 627 seems to have explicitly punted on
that.

Still, it's possible to use `importlib.metadata` to accomplish this.  Something
like:

    # use the backport since we're not 3.8+
    from importlib_metadata import distribution

    dist = distribution("nextstrain-cli")
    installer_file = next(f for f in dist.files if f.match("nextstrain_cli-*.dist-info/INSTALLER"))
    installer = installer_file.read_text().trim()

Note that under PyOxidizer, accessing `Distribution.files` will result in a
`NotImplementedError`, so that needs guarding against.  The distribution may
also not be found.
