# 3 October 2022
# or, …

<https://bedfordlab.slack.com/archives/C01LCTT7JNN/p1664316443860269?thread_ts=1662072691.294419&cid=C01LCTT7JNN>

managed-conda vs. conda vs. ???

Stay close to implementation/engine as it matters and there needs to be some
way to choose?  Or abstract it away further?

If we abstract it away further, then we could have `nextstrain setup foo` DTRT
based on the platform.  e.g. on Linux and macOS it'd do the Conda thing, but on
Windows it'd supplement with non-Conda packages too?  Ironically, this might be
the best use case for the "native" name.  lolsob

But I'm leaning towards keeping the runner/runtime name close to the
implementation/engine as there does always need to be a way to pick these
details, it reduces change/confusion, and it avoids "shifting sands" issues for
runners over time.  e.g. the Conda runtime is always going to be Conda based,
but the "generic non-container install" runtime may be implemented with Conda
one year and something entirely different the next, which seems fraught and
confusing.  **Instead, we'd make new runtimes, deprecate old ones, invest in
good detection of support + setup for each, and rely on folks to get the "best"
for them via our docs, or `nextstrain check-setup`, or a new unqualified
`nextstrain setup` or something (which could make platform-dependent
decisions).**

So the issue comes back to if "conda" is a confusing name because it implies
that it somehow interacts with the user's existing Conda installs or `conda`
command, etc.

It seems clear and unarguable that it's confusing, so it's whether that's too
big a stumbling block for folks or if we just get used to explaining it and
folks learn and move on.

Can we choose a name that's completely detached?  But then we're not linked to
the implementation again.  Hence "managed Conda" in the first place.

Am I talking myself in circles? Maybe!

Note that the "docker" runtime _does_ interact with the user's existing Docker
command/install, etc. and makes containers, images, etc. visible through that.
Though of course it's completely managed as well and we don't _expect_ users to
interact with it via the Docker CLI themselves.

Maybe that's not _so_ different though, as a user _can_ use the `conda` command
to manipulate our Conda runtime, though it's a bit more hidden.

…

Should we make it _not so hidden_?  e.g. install it into the place where it'd
be found by the standard Conda/Mamba/etc. commands?  hmm.  Seems like
sacrificing the decent chance of isolation/Just-Work-itude when hidden for the
benefit of being maybe less confusing?
